James Joyce's interest in mythology is as important an aspect of his works as it is obvious: one should find sufficient evidence for this in the name of the writer's literary alter ego, Stephen Dedalus (referring to the mythical artificer, Daedalus); even more so in the fact that Homer's Odyssey acts as a clear parallel to his second novel, Ulysses. Joyce's interest in transposing the myth of Odyssey as apropos to his own time can be traced to his correspondence with his Italian translator, Carlo Linati: 'The character of Ulysses has fascinated me ever since boyhood […] For seven years I have been working at [Ulysses],' in an effort to 'render the myth sub specie temporis nostri.'  T.S. Eliot, in his review of Ulysses, recognises Joyce's deliberation and defends the ability of the writer's 'mythical method' in giving 'a shape and significance to the immense panorama of futility and anarchy that is contemporary history.'  In other words, Joyce's preoccupation with classical mythology had produced an expression of and for modern times. To consider Ulysses as merely a modern recreation of the Odyssey, however, would be to invalidate Joyce's achievement. In fact, he found classical heroism to be 'damn vulgar […] the whole structure of heroism is, and always was, a damned lie.'  Indeed, the two protagonists of Ulysses are not heroes (at least not in the Homeric sense), but each reflects the modern everyman.
A rather broad reason as to why Joyce found conventional heroism repulsive had its roots in the Irish Literary Revival, which sought to reimagine Irish folk heroes such as Fionn mac Cumhaill and Cú Chulainn in an effort to spur its nationalistic impulse.  This is clear in works that were written during this time, such as History of Ireland: The Heroic Period by Standish James O'Grady and Poets and Dreamers by Lady Gregory, who attempt to identify heroic folklore with the spirit of the Irish. Joyce's response to this characteristic of the Revival was anything but positive.  He did not trust this form of nationalistic 'self-consolation' to which the movement aspired because it implied, primarily, a sense of populist appeal. Not that Joyce was particularly against the masses, but he had noticed that this played into the sense of servitude from which the movement was trying to break free. He justifies this claim in his essay The Day of the Rabblement by noting the Irish Literary Theatre failed to stage the 'European masterpieces' it had initially declared it would for fear of censorship. 'Nothing can be done until the forces that dictate public judgement are calmly confronted […] But, of course, the directors would not like to present such improper writers to the uncultivated, much less the cultivated, rabblement,' he writes.  In another early essay titled A Portrait of the Artist (which he later expanded into his first, semiautobiographical novel, A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man), he recognises this to be problematic for the seeming nationalism of the group, since 'in their relations among themselves and towards their superiors they displayed a nervous and (wherever there was question of authority) a very English liberalism.'  Thus, according to Joyce, nationalism and populism were incongruous to each other for Irish art.
Another reason for Joyce's aversion to traditional heroism had to do purely with his aesthetic outlook: he could not stand the sense of idealism implied. He was drawn more towards the works of Henrik Ibsen because of their realist nature and classicist appeal, both of which he felt were 'proper' for the growth of any artist in that they avoided art's moralist tendencies to be religious or beautiful for the sake of being didactic, and were most concerned with the true expression of life: 'Art is true to itself when it deals with truth,' in Joyce's own words.  The Literary Theatre, on the other hand, was content with staging plays in the English and Irish languages of romantic heroes that were contrary to Joyce's tastes; all of this displeased the young writer, who thought that the Revival was slowly becoming narrow-minded in prioritising its rural audience. In this way, the Revival combined parochialism and idealism rather uncomfortably for Joyce. In other words, the movement could not offer much that would help him achieve his true ambitions as an artist. As a result, Joyce refused to participate in the movement, which necessarily means that he did not want to look to Irish myth as his source. Thus, he revealingly declares that Ireland and its literati in their present state offer 'no literary model to the artist, and he must look abroad.'  His intention is clear: he does not want to revive an old myth, he wants to create a new one.
Looking to Homer's Odyssey was much simpler for Joyce. The Greek epic tells the story of its hero's journey, through various trials and tribulations, back to his kingdom, Ithaca, following the Trojan War. Written in classical antiquity, Homer's texts have been noted for their realism and rejection of the magical and the fantastical.  What makes Odysseus particularly interesting is the emphasis on his human nature, his being which is 'defined by the double inevitability of age and death,' and the fact that he has to stand up to the immortal Gods and their indifferent, indisputable reason. To that extent, the Odyssey is anything but an idealistic work– it is very much a realistic story that captures a broad range of human experience by means of a singularly human protagonist– at least as far as Joyce was concerned. In a conversation with a language student of his, Joyce would reveal: 'The most beautiful, all-embracing theme is that of the Odyssey. It is greater, more human, than that of Hamlet, Don Quixote, Dante, Faust […] The most beautiful, most human traits are contained in the Odyssey […] I find the subject of Ulysses most human in world literature.' 
In essence, Joyce had always known that he wanted to write a novel on his hero's adventure through his native Dublin. The port city, once recognised as the second largest across the British Isles, had seen a rapid decline by going from being an important hub of commerce to a crowded metropolis that had stagnated due to a lack of dynamic industrial ventures, starting in 1801 due to the Act of Union that had considerably reduced its political importance. Most Dubliners (about two-thirds of the population) of Joyce's time were either in abject poverty or barely making ends meet, while the remaining third were, at the very least, relatively well-off. This economic divide was responsible for a 'caste system which operated with almost comprehensive efficiency.'  On the other hand, infrastructural development of the city had endowed it with modern facilities and Georgian architecture that recalled its importance as the prior economic centre of Ireland. Despite its shortcomings, Dublin stood as an unfailingly modern city.
It was surprising, then, that it had not received the kind of literary treatment that Homer had applied to his Greece, which itself had seen a similar decline in its cultural activities during the Dark Ages, when the poet is thought to have been born.  Dublin certainly had been impressed upon Joyce's mind even after he left for Europe in 1904, as he would remark in a letter to his brother, Stanislaus: 'When you remember that Dublin has been a capital for thousands of years, that it is the "second" city of the British empire, that it is nearly three times as big as Venice, it seems strange that no artist has given it to the world.'  Joyce, having seen both sides of Dublin, was quite keen to set his literary world within the city because he was fascinated by the city's cosmopolitan nature and global appeal just as much by its pockets of decrepitude and squalor with which he had been familiar. To the writer, his city posed as a contradiction of human commerce and reason with which the modern Dubliner had to come to terms. To that extent, this contradiction was not really a problem for the writer; on the contrary, this meant that Dublin exhibited a range of human life, emotions, and experiences. His native city was the gateway to the universal human experience, and he was aware of this, for he would, unsurprisingly, echo this sentiment to a fellow Dubliner he had just met in Paris after Ulysses was originally published in 1922: 'If I can get to the heart of Dublin I can get to the heart of all the cities of the world. In the particular is contained the universal.' 
Positive reactions to Ulysses, however, were hardly universal. Aside from the controversies he suffered as a result of a broad censorship culture in Europe and abroad, Joyce faced, more importantly, the persecution of his literary reason by the upholders of scientific reason. For instance, Carl Jung reviews the book as such:
Joyce's Ulysses is an inactive, merely perceiving consciousness; a mere eye, ear, nose, and mouth, a sensory nerve exposed […] to the roaring, chaotic, nonsensical cataract of psychic and physical happenings […] [Ulysses] not only begins and ends in nothingness, but it consists of nothing but nothingness […] Nothing comes to the reader; everything turns away from him and leaves him to gape after it. 

One can observe a note of empirical priority which Jung gives to the apparent 'nothingness' of the novel while aptly summarising the 'inactive' protagonist in terms of anatomical references. What is striking about the review is not so much the convenience itself of the keywords that Jung attempts to apply scientifically to the protagonist (though there are two and not one) of the novel, but rather the sense of reductionism implied which tries to capture the essence and meaning of the novel as a result, and this represents one of the greatest challenges that any writer of the early twentieth century faced: the scientific spirit that sought to simplify and confine the human condition within its rationale.
Insofar as Joyce tried to capture the 'universal' in his works, he was prone to adopt a complex frame of mind which essentially challenged the monistic framework of scientific inquiry. An associate of his, and a renowned writer in his own right, H.G. Wells would seem to emphasise this temperamental difference between Joyce's writings and his own fiction (which relied almost entirely upon scientific conventions) in a letter to the Irishman when he had asked the science fiction writer to help promote his new Work in Progress (which would materialise into his final work, Finnegans Wake):
The frame of my mind is a world wherein a big unifying and concentrating process is possible (increase of power and range by economy and concentration of effort) […] For it, I want language and statement as simple and clear as possible […] Your mental existence is obsessed by a monstrous system of contradictions. 

While Joyce was concerned with capturing the human experience in its various nuances, Wells was concerned with ennobling scientific endeavour for its 'unifying' and therefore idealistic tendencies in his writings. One of the primary worries Wells discusses in this letter is concerned with the linguistic experimentation that Joyce employs in his works because it problematises the simplicity of language, which, according to scientific convention, must be as clear as it should be logical. As Wells further contends, this linguistic experimentation means that Joyce turns his 'back on common men, on their elementary needs and their restricted time and intelligence.'  Like Jung, Wells seems to restrict the modern commoner to their 'elementary needs' and therefore eliminates any reason for Joyce carry out his experiments. It points to one of Joyce's concerns, that the modern convention insists on reducing art to its 'moral, idealising tendencies.'  By extension, this meant limiting art's capacity for expressing truth.
	Unsurprisingly, Joyce had been more sceptical of modern reason which sought to restrict language than Wells was of his experimentation. The many linguistic shifts that Joyce employs in Ulysses serve to critique this very modern notion of a simplistic use of language. This is particularly emphasised in the 'Oxen of the Sun' episode– which may just have been the singular cause of Wells's aforementioned worry– wherein Joyce's prose parodies the 'development [of English prose] from Latin to Anglo-Saxon up to the late nineteenth century.'  In doing so, he also recapitulates the progression of human thought from homogeneity to heterogeneity. For instance, in the passages which describe the general scene of the maternity hospital's common room as Leopold Bloom enters and joins the company of students inside, the style recalls Middle English prose.  The description of the room and its general atmosphere seems homogenous alike the style of the description itself. There are variations across these passages which correspond to the differing styles of the medieval writers John Mandeville and Thomas Malory, but they appear quite homogenous to give a sense of communalism to the crowd of men.  The style follows a clear progression up to the nineteenth century prose of the closing passages, wherein the style becomes notably heterogenous in the sense that each passage has a distinct tone in order to express distinct ideas. For example, the passage in the style of Thomas Huxley (scientist and rationalist) discusses rather indifferently childbirth and infant mortality. The immediate next passage switches to the style of Dickensian narrative, which captures the sentimentality of Mina Purefoy when she successfully gives birth to a boy and holds him. 
	Out of all the points that Joyce may have intended to make with 'Oxen of the Sun,' these linguistic shifts primarily seem to contend that the development of human thought is not just contingent on an idea but also the form in which it is able to express the same idea. In other words, the multiplicity of language, when developed over centuries, allows it to define the pluralistic nature of human experience. One could argue, like Wells, that Joyce was indeed problematising the reason of modern life by writing in a language not 'simple and clear as possible,' and one would be right: because Joyce critiques modern reason by writing about the depth of linguistic development in an age that was (and still is) predominantly concerned with modern reason which insists on simplifying phenomena. The 'frame of mind' which Wells and Jung inhabited, that which conflates idealism and rationalism, threatened to restrict the artist in his use of language which, without its true pluralistic form, cannot account for his search for truth with which he was so concerned. This is one of the first ideas that Joyce intended to discuss in this episode, as he reveals in a letter to Frank Budgen: 'the idea being the crime committed against fecundity by sterilising the act of coition;' or, in other words, the crime against artistic creation by limiting the use of language.   As Richard Ellmann summarises: 'it was in fact absurd of Wells to pretend that language was fixed, or exclusively rational.' 
Joyce did not take offence to Wells's letter; on the contrary, he received it with utmost respect for the scientific mind attempting to reconcile within its rational limits the 'monstrous system of contradictions.' Perhaps the reason for his coolness was that Wells did not so much challenge Joyce's views– he, in fact, confirmed them on account of his 'scientific, constructive' training. In any case, Joyce was aware of how modern conventions were restricting art even before he began writing Dubliners. In his essay, titled Drama and Life, the young writer had some idea of how philosophical inquiry, in its claim to the objective truth, would idealise art's moral value and reject its capacity for expressing subjective truths, which quite bothered him.  However, his idea was clearly, at such a young age, confined to his aesthetic concerns. It is thus worth discussing how Joyce reached this level of thought with regard to mythology and reason by the time he had finished writing Ulysses in the context of his engagement with the works of two particularly interesting philosophers: Giambattista Vico and Friedrich Nietzsche.
Traditional understanding of the progression of modern Western civilisation from its origin in Classical antiquity has been rooted in the distinction between what scholarly convention has recognised to be two forms of thought: mythos (mythic imagination) and logos (logical reasoning). Mythos and logos have been generally considered opposites, with mythic imagination being understood as the 'imagistic and involuntary' distortion of the real world, while reason its clarification, 'conceptual and intentional.'  Rationalist inquiry, which adopts a predominantly empiricist framework in the hopes of acquiring cognition as in the works of Aristotle and Hegel, naturally tends to prioritise reason over its mythical source to the extent that myth's role in the formation of a rationale is considered 'an error, a lie, a sacrilege, or a mere entertainment.' 
On the other hand, in response to the rationalists who rejected the mythic origins of logos, there developed an argument for myth's allegorical value in the formation of logical thought. The allegorists would seem to defend the importance of mythos as a precursor to rational truth, suggesting that mythos is in fact accommodated logos– one can trace the derivation of reason from mythical works. This argument, despite in slight favour of mythos, problematises the justification of mythos on its own (that is, without depending on its logos): for one can surely apply rationale to myth to critique how it 'accommodates' reason, but one cannot use mythos to critique logos. Another problem that the allegorical view introduces is the fact that mythos is only justified if and only if it leads to logos.  In any case, both rationalists and allegorists point to the same general argument that imaginative storytelling must end up producing practical reason. The mythopoeic writer has only one ultimate goal: rational truth. It is not difficult to see how Jung and Wells belong to this broad group of thinkers who contend that mythic beginnings lead– or must lead– to rational ends.
The Italian philosopher Giambattista Vico was one of the earliest thinkers to challenge such a rationalistic treatment of mythos that had gained prominence by the eighteenth century. In his work The New Science, Vico claims that the etymological breakdown of the word 'mythology' (Greek 'muthologia,' which is a combination of the words 'muthos,' meaning speech and fable, and 'logion' which descends from 'logos' meaning word and reason) certainly points to a 'poetic logic' within storytelling, but the language in which this is first achieved is itself not logically developed enough to be independent of the fictive aspects of the fable or story. Following this line of thought, he argues that although the fictive elements of a story may be false in the sense that they represent untruthfully the objective truth, the fable or story itself is true in the sense that it expresses truthfully the aim of the mythopoeic writer. He thus redefines myth as 'vera narratio' (true narrative).  The implication of such a redefinition is a polemic stance against that rationalistic view which does not tolerate the capacity for a subjective interaction with such distant concepts as history. Where rationality demands that history ought to be a narrative of scientific facts, mythology itself presents a 'historical narrative with a poetic logic of its own,' going beyond the limits of rational reasoning.  
It is appropriate, in this context, that a major torment that Stephen Dedalus endures throughout Ulysses is his disillusionment with history. 'History is a nightmare from which I am trying to awake,' he remarks, because history, as per modern reason, is bereft of its source in poetic imagination and logic.  In the 'Nestor' episode, Stephen finds it difficult to maintain a sense of decorum in the classroom while he is teaching a history lesson to his students. They seem to take the lesson rather lightly perhaps out of boredom of rote learning historical events which do not impress upon them, highlighting how 'history was a tale like any other too often heard.'  History feels just as much passive to Stephen, who indulges in his reveries, pondering on various ideas about history rather than making the lesson any interesting. They seem to control his thoughts and draw his attention away from his immediate surroundings, implying that he, too, like his students, finds little value in discussing impersonal historical events. It can be said that Stephen's meditations on the nature of history (such as the Aristotelian idea of 'actuality of the possible as possible' which he advances internally) are his rational attempts to come to terms with a factually historicist understanding of the past. This leads him nowhere, however, because, in following the Aristotelian strand of thought, he comes across a dilemma: 'can those have been possible seeing that they never were? Or was that only possible which came to pass?' 
The dilemma is at odds with Aristotelian reason in that it points to a weakness in such a rationalist treatment of historical truth. If a possibility is actualised in history, it is written in history, but if it does not actualise, it is not documented in history– and therefore not a possibility. It points to the homogeneity of a rationalistic understanding of history which severely restricts the modern man from learning of the many nuances of past events and human lives. History is, thus, nothing but a 'dull ease of the mind' to Stephen.  His remark that 'history is a nightmare from which I am trying to awake,' then refers to, other than the obvious allusion to Ireland's historical subjugation by the English, the fact that the young artist is trapped in a world of modern reason which has forced him to embrace the stagnant, factual historicity of the past rather than a lively, mythological one which would be conducive to his artistic temperament. This mirrors what Joyce, in agreement with Vico, tells Frank Budgen: 'Imagination is nothing but the working over of what is remembered,' essentially arguing that 'imagination is memory.'  Stephen, whose memory is paralysed by his guilt over the death of his mother and the loss of his sense of belonging to his homeland, is left in search for something which transcends the mere rationality of the modern life which he inhabits. 
In the nineteenth century, the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche levied a similar attack against the rationalists by arguing for a myth-centric approach to the criticism of modern reason in his work The Birth of Tragedy. The book centres on his critique of Socratic logos using the Apollonian-Dionysus mythos, and has been considered one of the most successful polemical accounts of this tradition of thought. One of the key points that The Birth of Tragedy makes is that 'only a culture bounded by myths could achieve unity and identity, and that modern culture could be redeemed only if a new mythology could arise.'  Stephen Dedalus mentions towards the very end of Portrait: 'I go to encounter for the millionth time the reality of my experience and to forge in the smithy of my soul the uncreated conscience of my race.'  It is almost as if Joyce prefigures in Stephen the 'redeemer' of modern society who would come up with a 'new mythology' so modern Dublin could achieve a new sense of unity and identity.  But this is not the case in Ulysses. What one realises in the novel's opening episode 'Telemachus' is that Stephen has been deprived of his early energy and enthusiasm and, thus, has been relegated to an almost paralytic state of existence. Stephen is, as Joyce had been before him, an artist without a mythic source for his creation. This is the singular reason for Stephen's fruitless engagement with history as it was for Joyce's frustration with the inadequacy of the Literary Revival as discussed above. What this points to in Ulysses is a Dublin that is not only without its own mythos, but a Dublin which is barely surviving by the rules of modern logos: a 'dehellenised' Dublin, unaccounted for its multifariousness and without a uniquely Dublin voice. 
In this sense, Buck Mulligan's call to 'hellenise' Ireland is a serious suggestion: it is not so much a call to reuse Greek myth to write a national epic as it is a call to revert modern reason back to its mythical origins. Nietzsche equates the loss of a 'native myth' with the loss of culture, forcing 'the lawless roving of the artistic imagination' to 'nourish itself wretchedly from other cultures,' as does the other Odysseus of Ulysses, Leopold Bloom, who wanders through the streets of Dublin, attempting to derive meaning out of his wanderings.
And now the myth-less man remains eternally hungering among all the bygones, and digs and grubs for roots, though he have to dig for them even among the remotest antiquities. The stupendous historical exigency of the unsatisfied modern culture, the gathering around one of countless other cultures, the consuming desire for knowledge—what does all this point to, if not to the loss of myth, the loss of the mythical home, the mythical source? 

It is perhaps only Bloom that could embody such a demanding archetype of the Nietzschean 'myth-less man.' His characterisation allows him to be a dehellenised cosmopolitan: a Jewish convert into Protestantism, an advertising canvasser, and a rationalist– just vague enough to be the typical modern everyman. While Bloom is in many ways different from Stephen, they both share the fate of a myth-less existence (although it is only Stephen who is quite affected by this), and end up sharing each other's company by night-time. Their primary difference lies in their outlook: Stephen, the artistic; Bloom, the rationalist. Joyce makes it clear that Bloom wanders the streets of Dublin so as to avoid confronting his wife Molly about her affair with Blazes Boylan. In fact, part of Bloom's search for rationality is rooted in his irrationality to avoid Molly and Boylan. For instance, in the 'Hades' episode when others are talking about Boylan, Bloom avoids partaking in the discussion by directing his attention entirely to the scrutiny of his fingernails.  The 'Ithaca' episode, in particular, emphasises the overly rationalistic 'myth-less' man's attempt at the resolution of the novel's challenges (almost as if Joyce were parodying how the likes of Wells and Jung would have written an episode of Ulysses).
	Written as a series of questions and answers, the episode follows what Joyce calls 'mathematical catechism,' with each question being answered in a manner which fulfils empirical observation but avoids describing the emotional state of both characters.  As a result, Bloom's isolation from Molly and modern society seem much more evident in the safety of his own house than anywhere else in the novel because of the factual nature of the descriptions of his odyssey through Dublin. It seems as though the episode's narrative avoids resolving the myth-less man's search for his truth in an 'unsatisfied modern culture,' which heightens the episode's 'consuming desire for knowledge–' much like how Bloom avoids to resolve his domestic conflict– in Joyce's own way of pointing to an 'unsatisfied modern' Dublin which has lost its mythic source. 

